>> Anjana Vakil: So when we talk about
functional programs [LAUGH] there's
a hint right there in the terminology.
In imperative programming or
object oriented program, well,
imperative programming.
What is a program made up of?
A bunch of commands.
Maybe those are grouped together
into things like procedures or
impure functions, but
that's what the program is made up of.
In object oriented programming,
the program is made up of not those
kind of pure individual commands,
but that imperative logic is wrapped
up in these things we call objects,
and that's what the program is made up of,
a bunch of objects.
In functional programming,
a program is just a function, or
perhaps it's better to say it's
a bunch of functions all used
together to do whatever computation
our boss wants us to [LAUGH].
So when we think about a functional
program, we are thinking about a function.
The question is, how do we make a useful
program that's just one function?
Well, we do that by taking a bunch
of smaller functions that do
smaller bits of that program and
composing them into one.
And so this is kind of a very
basic illustration of that.
We talked about having a pure function
that just takes in one thing and
returns another thing.
So maybe we have a f here that's like,
given a circle,
give me the equivalent
triangle of the same color.
And that output is just more data,
which means it's ready to
be an input to a function.
So we can just keep passing.
Input becomes output, which becomes input,
which becomes output, which becomes input,
which becomes output.
So, if I have two functions, one of which
doesn't change the color, but changes
the shape, and the other of which doesn't
change the shape, but changes the color.
If I pass a shape through both of them,
I will get the changed shape and
the changed color.
And this is a composition
of those two functions.
And this is the only kind of little
bit of a gotcha that you want to keep
in mind here is that this is
equivalent to essentially,
what we're doing is we're calling f on x,
and then we're calling g on that.
But the idea here is that in our pipeline,
we think about it kind of left to right,
but sometimes when you're
writing this encode.
We have to kind of mentally flip flop
to right to left, which as we said,
at least here in the West,
where we often are very conventionalized
to left to right thinking just as
a little small, little gotcha.
You just wanna think about which
functions being called first, and
in the parentheses execution, whatever's
inside is gonna be called first.
And you also might see another way of
writing function composition that you
might remember from math class.
Just like a little circle that
thing that goes between f and g.
So you sometimes might see another
functional programming notation,
a different type of notation
that says f dot g or
like f circle g means the composition of
f and g, which is equivalent to this.
So you might see slightly different.
It's like visual jargon, I don't know.
Okay, so for example, and
this is where it starts
to become clear how our partial
applications can be reused.
Earlier we had endectifier,
in this case, we're gonna make an ender,
and what that's gonna do is
take in an ending like rocks or
y'all, or [LAUGH] and
it's going to return a function.
And this is now we're getting into
sort of pipelines of arrow functions,
which is again getting closer and closer
to the syntax you might see in more purely
functional languages, should you ever
decide to abandon our best friend Java's.
Just kidding.
But so this function ender is, well,
the function that is
returned is gonna take
in an input and then smoosh them together.
So that means that this blue
part is a closure, essentially,
this is just a separate way, a different
syntax for writing that nesting.
So within this second arrow function, we
have access to the outer scope as well as
the current scope, and you can extend this
to as many different layers as you want.
And in fact, the lambda calculus,
which is the theoretical underpinnings
of functional programming.
It's a mathematical system for
computation.
That is what Alonzo church invented
in the 30s, which became all
of the lambda logo to functional languages
we see at meetups today, whatever.
You can actually do this,
the type of things that you
would do in super hardcore,
original academic old school functional
programming with just like arrow
function after arrow function there's more
resources about that in the epilogue.
Okay, so given this ender function,
I can create a function called a door,
which is gonna say, I love that thing,
that thing rocks, right?
Or I can create an announce like, hey,
y'all, that's what I just said or
I can create an exclaim function that's
going to make everything align in my
email, cuz I write emails with like
80 million exclamation points,
if you ever send me an email,
correct get ready for exclamation points.
Also I'm terrible replying email,
so what we wanna do.
Let's say,
it's create like I wanna be able to
easily hype up any tech topic I want.
So I'm gonna create a hypeUp
function that's gonna
take in some kind of thing
that I'm excited about and
it's going to pipe it
through all the three of
these functions in order
to get the final output.
So in this case, I hype up js,
I get JS rocks, y'all.
I hype up FP I get FP rocks y'all.
And the only tricky bit
here is don't forget
that the order in which
those endings are gonna be
applied is not the same as
the order left to right
of what we will see in our source code,
right?
So the last thing that happens
as I add an exclamation point,
the first thing that
happens is I add rocks.
Then what that JS rocks gets
passed in to announce and
so then I get JS rocks y'all dead tone,
no excitement.
And then that result gets
passed into exclaim, and
now I get JS rocks y'all with the
excitement that we all deserve and crave.